 of  Teacher employment, increasing Teacher’s acquaintance and expertise, Teacher Deployment, Teacher withholding, Providing Schools with More accountability for Teaching staff growth, assessing and gratifying Effective Teaching,  Providing better prospects for professional variations, Enhancing headship and School environment, Improving functioning circumstances,  Redefining administrator’s Roles, supervising and supporting eminence development and perfection in the field. 
Zaidi, S.M.I.A., (2008) led an investigation on "Offices in Primary and Upper Primary Schools in India based on an examination of DISE Data of Selected major States" to inspect the situation of essential amenities which is provided in the primary and upper elementary schools in different Indian states. The information gathered through All India School Educational Survey led by NCERT every so often. Other than this, District Information System of Education (DISE) gives information in its region and state report cards every yeas about the status of elementary education. The examination of statistics of the same uncovers that numerous schools in the nation have yet not furnished with a fundamental amenities such as about 4% elementary schools and 12% upper grade schools don't have a proper edifice; moreover, just 70% elementary schools and 63% upper elementary schools have pucca structures. There are 17.5% elementary schools and 7.7% upper grade schools in the nation that have just a single teacher. It is a matter of great agonize that around 9 to 10 percent primary and upper grade schools don't have even writing boards. One fifth upper grade schools don't have the arrangement of drinking water. Absence of Play area and boundary walls is in the greater part of the elementary schools and more than one fourth of the upper grade schools in the nation is a matter of sorry state of education system. Regular toilets and girls’ toilets are absent in over 63% grade schools and 75% upper elementary schools. Additionally, availability of these facilities varies from state to state in our country. 
Mehta, (2008), while presenting the diagnostic report of NUEPA for 2006-07, on Elementary education in India, through DISE data, mentioned about certain facts needed to achieve the aim of Universalization of Elementary Education (UEE). The gist of his findings is: states which are smaller in terms of area are giving better results than some of those bigger stated. Hence it was needed to separately evaluate the related indicators so that states which need support can be identified and helped out. They found that if we have to achieve the goal of UEE and for the retention of school-goers, the drop-out rate which is the maximum at primary level; has to be improved. According to a study conducted by Plan India 2009, some of the main reasons for children in the age group 6-14 not attending the schools are  shortage of sports equipments and play ground, distance from home,  corporal reprimand, insensitive behavior of teachers, pressure of homework and class work, gender discrimination at home etc. 
 Mehta, (2008), while presenting the diagnostic report of NUEPA for 2006-07, on Elementary education in India, through DISE data, mentioned about certain facts needed to achieve the aim of Universalization of Elementary Education (UEE). The gist of his findings is: states which are smaller in terms of area are giving better results than some of those bigger stated. Hence it was needed to separately evaluate the related indicators so that states which need support can be identified and helped out. They found that if we have to achieve the goal of UEE and for the retention of school-goers, the drop-out rate which is the maximum at primary level; has to be improved. According to a study conducted by Plan India 2009, some of the main reasons for children in the age group 6-14 not attending the schools are  shortage of sports equipments and play ground, distance from home,  corporal reprimand, insensitive behavior of teachers, pressure of homework and class work, gender discrimination at home etc. 
Plan India, 2009, has introduced a rundown of the investigation 'Participatory way to deal with recognize purposes behind avoidance among out of school students' led in 4 states of India to discover for what reason are kids out of school? The report gives top to bottom knowledge about the conditions and status of society networks and explanations behind not sending their youngsters to class in the age limit 6-14 years, where actual planning works. It was discovered that unsociable attitude of instructors, using foul and offensive language and beating the child, schools far-off from the locality, absence of sports facilities, spare time activities, encumber of work pressure for example domestic work and caring for younger siblings, and ranch work, grazing of farm and domestic animals etc. were the main reasons due to which children are unable to get an access to education because of parents’ pressure.  
GOI (2010), has discharged the figures on kinds of schools, which shows that out of a total of 230683 schools in our country in 1950-51, 91% were of primary school category, 6% comprised of upper primary and 3% were spotted as secondary schools and above. In 2009-10, the yearly growth rate of schools for primary schools was measured 4.8% and the same was almost 39% for upper primary and senior secondary schools. It has completed a detailed investigation on government and non-public schools utilizing the components like access to education, registrations in schools, withdrawals and giving up from schools, daily turn out of students, development in overall education system, social and gender equality in schooling, dimension of accomplishment, nature of instruction, educators and teachers training and education, local societal partaking, utilizing information from supplementary sources of data. Keeping in view the populace standards, changing conventional remoteness and establishing schools in small and thinly populated areas has yielded positive outcomes. The researcher found that government schools are more costly than non-government schools with lower teacher answerability in India. 
Economic and Political Weekly (2011) surveyed the adequacy RTE 2009. In spite of the fact that there are enhancements in education particularly in physical framework of the schools, the Annual Status of Education Report (ASER) featured the turn down of enlisted children  present in the class in the course of recent years and furthermore declining of nature of learning. Additionally, it was recommended to employ adequate instructors in the school, spotlighting concentration on course books, teachers’ education, making the learning procedure connecting enough by involving students in teaching-learning process to keep hold the kids who had been influenced to enlist. 
Nishith Prakash, (2012), stated that education in Bihar has been improving faster than in the rest of the country. But for real gains, the state needs to improve in certain areas e.g. to provide drinking water facilities to everyone, separate toilets for girls in schools, and more efficient teachers and classrooms per student. Development is the ultimate goal of every society and If it has to be sustainable, people need to be better educated. In terms of economic gain, education contributes to growth by increasing the level of human capital of the personnel—as in the Indian IT sector. Otherwise also, education can equip people with the tools for a more rewarding and enjoyable life. The government of the state has recently undertaken several policy initiatives to make education more affordable and accessible to children who have focused on reducing the opportunity outlay of schooling and providing inducements for enrolment and performance. 
They found that though Bihar is improving in terms of enrollment and the drop-out cases but a lot more is to be done to improve the quality of education because majority of students in in elementary schools are unable to read simple sentences or solve simple mathematical problems of the grades lower than those of their class. Regarding the nutrition and health and hygiene issues of the students, government has taken useful steps by implementing various programs with a follow up of the same. Also rewarding the students and teachers for their efforts and proper monitoring of them can bring in fruitful results. Recently cost on education for parents has been reduced by subsidizing textbooks, bicycles, cash transfer, uniforms, MDM, free ration etc., much needs to be done in terms of infrastructure and for the betterment of both, students and teachers. Also, state-wide system of statistics needs to be framed to connect the performance of students with the effectiveness of teachers.
Sanjay Kumar,(2018), mentioned in the Blogs of Times of India on October 26 that many of the schools in the country are lacking basic amenities e.g. there is no library facility in about 31% schools and in some of the schools if library is there,  in 36.6% schools children were not given access to it. As identified by ASER report 2016 and DISE’s report, in about 92% schools computers are not installed. Playground for kids to play was found only in 38% schools while only 40% schools were facilitated to use electricity. Boundary wall which is a mandatory border for safety of the school kids was found only in 53.38% schools. 
Jyoti kumar, (2018), DEO, Patna, after inspecting 15 schools in district Patna, informed The Times of India on August 31, 2018, that when cross checked with 77 teachers, 14 of them were found inefficient. Toilets and drinking water which are the most important amenities were found inadequate and non-functional in 4 schools while in two of those schools, MDM was not provided to the children in spite of collecting funds from the administration. About 50% of the students were found absent and many teachers were found absent from their duties. As far as human resource facility in terms of teachers is concerned, number of teachers required in elementary schools is too short as compared to that set by RTE criteria and the teachers who are teaching in the schools are not trained and qualified. Many schools in the district are running without teachers putting up a question mark on the future of the students of those schools. This is the reason why most of the students are dependent on coaching classes in Patna. 
Summary: Reviews based on lack of appropriate resources and policies as an impediment to achieve the goal of quality education clearly states that the factors responsible for non-attainment of the objective are inaccessibility of course books, insufficiency of teachers, lack of materialistic plan, shortage of skilled teachers, deficit in physical infrastructure, poor drinking water and toilet facilities, poor management and supervision, high student teacher ratio, Non-implementation of policies, teachers’ offensive behavior with the students, low quality and shortage of government funded training, lack of technological devices in schools etc. 

SOME HIGHLIGHTS REVEALING THE GAP OF RELATED LITERATURE:
LITERATURE SURVEY AND RESEARCH GAP:
Sl No.
Papers/Articles on Teachers Sensitivity/
Effectiveness  & “Journal”
Author/
Proposed by
Year of Publication
Technique used/ Information available
Findings/Remarks
1.
Teachers in Multi-Cultural Societies: Excellence and Leadership

“International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research”
Tamar Ketko
2017
Descriptive, qualitative, observational, analytical and interpretative in nature. 
The study is a focused and intensive effort to analyze the issues related to primary education with the inclusive study of teachers’ sensitivity towards the same.  In other words, it tries to look into the inclusion of dimensions of discrimination within and outside the school as a whole and to explore the relationship between teachers and students in the direction of quality education. It also examines the special case study of training such teachers against the background of a multicultural existence with moral obligations in the State of Israel.


2.
Teacher and teaching effects on students’ attitude and behaviours

“Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis”
 
David Blazar & Mathew A Kraft


2017
They examined that to what extent do teachers and their teaching practices affect students’ attitude and behaviors in class along with their test scores by drawing a dataset from NCTE (national centre for teacher effectiveness)of upper elementary classroom and a student survey.
Studied on teachers’ sensitivity and its impact on student’ behaviour beyond their core academic skills and gave the term “Teaching effects” for the relationships between teaching practice and students’ outcome.


3.
Meaning of teacher thinking in curriculum transaction
NCERT Position Paper “Voices of teachers and teacher educators”
Vol. VI, pp. 58-60
N. Sureshkumar
2017
It focuses on vital role of teachers’ education in India to provide quality education to all children irrespective of gender, cast, creed, religion and geography. 
Teacher educational programme are designed to prepare teachers and to provide a professional touch through their course component and professional development. The professionalism of teacher is, what matters, if the concern is, for the learning and development of all children, and certainly not for a few who can. 
4.
Teachers’ Perspective of their Role and Student Autonomy in the PBL Context in China 
“International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research”


Huichun Li and Xiangyun Du
2015
In this qualitative study, 32 Semi structured interviews are conducted in this research to explore in-depth, the interviewees’ insight of a particular phenomenon or process, as opposed to the closed-end interview. Further, observation is conducted as complementary means to triangulate the validity of the data.
In China, role of teachers towards innovation in teaching is lead by transforming from an instructor to a facilitator and from lecture method to problem solving method. The study made at two Chinese universities depicts teachers’ perceptions of their interference in students learning by giving them a balanced autonomy. 
5.
Positive teacher–student relationships go beyond the classroom, problematic ones stay inside
“The Journal of Educational Research”
Luce C. A. Claessensa, JanvanTartwijka,AnnaC.vanderWantb,HelenaJ.M.Pennings a,NicoVerloop b, PerryJ.denBrokc, andTheoWubbelsa
 2015
Interview data from 28 teachers were examined by coding utterances on teacher and student interactions. Results indicate that teachers deﬁned the quality of the relationship mostly by the level of communion (friendly vs. hostile), instead of by the level of agency (in control vs. powerless). Analyses of mentioned teacher and student behavior show a friendly interactional pattern for positive relationships and a hostile pattern for problematic ones.
This research shows the importance of out of class teacher– student interactions in relationships. Their findings proved that Positive teacher–student relationships also have a strong relation with student motivation and learning. Therefore, attention for building positive one-on-one teacher–student relationships deserves a place in the curricula of teacher education and professional development programs.
6.
What Makes Good Teachers Good?  A Cross-Case Analysis of the Connection Between Teacher Effectiveness and  Student Achievement
“SAGE, Journal of Teacher Education”
James H. Stronge1, Thomas J. Ward1, and Leslie W. Grant
 2011
This study examined classroom practices of effective versus less effective teachers (based on student achievement gain scores in reading and mathematics). In Phase I of the study, hierarchical linear modeling was used to assess the teacher effectiveness of 307 fifth-grade teachers in terms of student learning gains. In Phase II, 32 teachers (17 top quartile and 15 bottom quartile) participated in an in-depth cross-case analysis of their instructional and classroom management practices.
This study found that top-quartile teachers had fewer classroom disruptions, better classroom management skills, and better relationships with their students than did bottom quartile teachers. One interpretation of this finding is that differences in personalities and dispositions of students can better explain the differences found among the teachers.
7. 
Public provisioning for elementary education in India
(Sage Publications India”
Praveen K Jha, Subrat Das, S S Mohanty & N K Jha
2008
It focuses on elementary education in India towards UEE in the country.
It tracks budget expenditure and budgetary and planning processes in SSA in AP, Bihar, Gujarat and Rajasthan. And addressed the causes of funding crisis in states and the policy measures for improving the flow of public expenditure on education in elementary education.
8.
Teacher-student relationships and engagement: Conceptualizing, measuring and improving the capacity og classroom interactions
“Handbook of Research on Student Engagement”
Robert C Pianta, Bridget K Hamre & Joseph P Allen
2007
They presented the Teaching through Interactions (TTI) framework a system which was theoretically driven and empirically supported for conceptualizing, organizing and measuring classroom interactions between students and teachers into three major domains-emotional support, classroom organizations and instructional support
They studied on Teachers’ Sensitivity and opined that teachers are thought and expected not only to raise test scores but also to provide emotionally supportive environments that contribute to students’ social and emotional development, manage classroom behaviours, deliver accurate content and support critical thinking.


9.
Teacher eﬃcacy: capturing an elusive construct
“Teaching and Teacher Education”
Megan Tschannen-Morana, Anita Woolfolk Hoy
2001
According to Rotter’s Rand measure, a tool or construct was framed and then a new and effective measure of teacher efficacy was created based on a model of teacher eﬃcacy suggested by Tschannen-Moran, Woolfolk Hoy, and Hoy (1998) along with validity and reliability data from three separate studies. Finally, new directions for research made possible by this instrument are explored for better students’ achievement.
Teacher eﬃcacy, as measured by the OSTES, was found to be negatively related to pupil control ideology, that is, teachers with a greater sense of their own eﬃcacy tended to be less custodial in their attitudes towards students.  The three dimensions of eﬃcacy for instructional strategies, student engagement, and classroom management represent the richness of teachers’ work lives and the requirements of good teaching.












10.
Pre primary & Primary education in Tripura & Cachar
“Development and Problems”
S.C.Acharya 
1984
They studied on pre primary and primary education system in Schools of Tripura and Cachar.
inaccessibility of course books, insufficiency of teachers, difficulty of materialistic plans, problems of single teacher school, shortage of skilled and competent teacher, nonappearance of ample school society relationships, poor management and supervision, lack of place for teachers are a few of the causes which have a off-putting effect on primary school system.

As it has been proved by various investigations by the researchers in different fields and the experiential studies on association between teachers and children in class reveal, it brings in an unswerving and direct effect on teachers’ capability to bring improvement in their efficacy hence bringing advancement into the lives of children who are associated with them.  Accordingly, this study aims to improve the quality of research on student-teacher relationships, responsible to bring in a holistic development in the personality of the student which is an important objective of quality education too.  
RESEARCH  GAP:
Many studies have been done in the related field and views have been shared and suggested about the significance of teachers’ behavior and its impact on students’ performance. Researcher would like to mention forthrightly that this thesis is in no way anticipated to disprove the authenticity, consistency, or common utility of any of the existing tool or studies examined and reviewed while working on this research.  Rather, it was tried to put together the vast asset of information and tools which is available about the importance of teachers’ sensitivity by developing a positive student-teacher relationships to bring in quality education and to examine them from a different angle by integrating multiple measurement tools and theoretical approaches.   
